So good morning everyone.
My name is Steve Canon.
I'm a senior engineer in
the Vector Numerics group.
And today I'm going to be talking to you
about the Accelerate Framework for iOS.
So just a little bit of introduction.
What is the Accelerate Framework?
We like to think of it as being
sort of one stop shopping for high
performance computational libraries.
What kind of libraries?
We introduced it on iOS in iOS 4 and
we introduced three libraries in iOS 4.
The first was VDSP,
which is a digital signal
processing library.
It can do everything from sort
of basic operations on vectors,
adding them and multiplying
them and things like that,
on up to some one dimensional
convolutions and fast Fourier transforms.
The second library that we
introduced in iOS 4 is called BLAS,
which is an industry standard library
of basic linear algebra routines.
And that includes things like
matrix-matrix operations and products
between matrices and vectors,
all that kind of stuff.
And the last one was LAPAC,
which stands for linear algebra package.
That's also an industry standard library.
and LAPAC provides sort of high
level linear algebra operations.
If you want to solve a system of
equations or that kind of stuff,
then LAPAC is what you want to use.
On the Mac, where we've had Accelerate
for a very long time,
we also have a few other things.
We have Vimage,
which is a image processing framework,
and we have Vforce,
which is a vector math library.
It provides the same kind of operations
that you find in the system math library,
but on vectors of data
instead of on scalar data.
And today, we are bringing
all of those same libraries to iOS 5.
So we're adding vimage
and we're adding vforce.
So my goals for this session are sort
of to introduce you to the new to iOS
components of the Accelerate Framework.
Those of you who are primarily iOS
developers who don't have a lot of
experience on the Mac may be asking,
you know, what's in these new libraries?
So we're just going to give you
a broad overview of what's there.
And the other thing we want to do is
spend a little bit of time just talking
about the improvements we've made
to the stuff that was already there,
the components that we had in iOS 4.
and what I really want you to do,
or what I really want to do,
is to help you identify places in
your code that you might be able
to use the components we provide
to you in the Accelerate Framework.
So let's dive right in.
We're going to start with vImage,
which as I mentioned,
this is new in iOS 5.
And vImage stands for the Vectorized
Image Processing Framework.
We introduced it on the Mac in 10.3.
And it's proved to be
pretty popular on the Mac.
In fact,
it's used in six out of seven of the
top grossing apps on the Mac App Store.
So it's been very popular on the Mac.
And we've had a lot of
requests to bring it to iOS,
so we're really excited
that we have it there now.
So just to start out,
for those of you who
aren't familiar with it,
I'm going to give you a small example.
Let's start with by
looking at convolution,
which is one of the most
important and also one of the most
complicated operations in V-image.
And it forms the core of a lot
of common image processing tasks.
Convolution is basically the
weighted average of nearby pixels.
For each pixel in an image,
you're going to compute a new image
based on the pixels that surround
the pixel you're interested in.
and it gets used to do blur, sharpen,
edge detection, emboss filters,
lots and lots of image
processing algorithms are
fundamentally convolutions.
So just to explain a
little more what I mean,
if we look at sort of what we do,
if we were going to evaluate
the convolution on that
center pixel in the image,
what we do is we have
a matrix of weights,
it's called a kernel and we multiply
that by the window around that pixel.
So here we have a three by three kernel,
so we take a three by three window
around the pixel that we're interested
in and we multiply each weight by
the corresponding pixel and then
we sum those all up and that gives
us a new color in the output image.
Now here, there were some white pixels
and some darker purple pixels,
so when we mix them together,
we get kind of a lighter purple
color and then we just do this
process across the whole image.
So you get something like this.
This is--this is a small blur kernel,
so you can see it's smoothed out a
hard edge from sort of dark purple
to white to be a smoother transition.
That's very basic convolution.
Now you could write a
convolution yourself.
It's not terribly hard.
This is sort of the simplest
kernel of a convolution that
you could--you could write.
But you really shouldn't do this.
So why not?
Well, that simple example I showed you
there has a lot of problems with it.
It doesn't handle edging properly.
When you look at a pixel that's
close to the edge of an image,
that kernel is actually going to
hang off the side of the image.
And you need to handle that properly.
It results in a lot of edging code.
It's kind of a pain.
It doesn't handle integer overflow.
This is just a basic thing.
But it's something you have to deal with.
And more to the point,
and what I care about, it's really slow.
So instead of writing your own--
[Transcript missing]
and it uses about a tenth the
energy to use the vimage convolve
as it does to use a good high
quality scalar implementation.
So this is really nice.
It means your app is
going to last longer and,
you know,
your users can use your app longer,
which is great.
That's good for you.
That means they like your app
and they get to play with it.
So that's sort of a brief introduction
into why you should use vImage.
I think three good points.
It's simple, it's fast,
and it uses less energy.
So what else do we provide?
We provide a big variety of operations
and we're just going to kind of
walk through each of the categories
and see roughly what's there.
We just talked about convolution.
Just to give you a little
bit more about that.
As I mentioned, it's the weighted
average of nearby pixels.
We also let you to supply a
bias that can be applied to it.
That's often useful for certain kernels.
And we allow you to use a different
set of weights for each color channel.
And we give--I mentioned the
problem of edging before.
We give you a bunch of
different ways to handle edging.
You can do--use the background color.
You can do edge extend where you
basically treat the edge pixels as
though they went off to infinity.
We also have a mode called truncate
and a sort of do nothing mode where
you just assume the data's there.
And then we also have
geometry operations.
These are pretty self-explanatory,
but we'll have some
pictures here to help out.
We have rotation operations.
We have shearing operations.
can reduce and enlarge your image.
I should mention that a lot
of these geometry operations
need to do resampling.
We use Lantos sampling,
so you're going to get really good
high quality output images from this.
Not only is it fast,
but you get really nice image quality.
We also provide Affine Warp.
which is just a general affine
transformation applied to the image.
And we have Reflect which
is very straightforward.
We have transformations.
These operate on the
color space of the image.
So they operate pixel by pixel.
They do some transform to the colors.
We have matrix multiplications,
which you can use for
color space conversions,
like if you want to move
from RGB to YUV or HSV.
And you can also use them just to
directly manipulate the hue or the
saturation of an image or to just
sort of twist the color space.
We also have gamma correction
operations and we have fast
polynomial and rational evaluators.
Since you can approximate any
function well with polynomial
or rational approximation,
this sort of lets you do just
about anything you want to
the color space of the image.
So these are just a few examples
of the sorts of things you can
do with the transform operations,
the basically color space operations.
We have morphology operations.
These are kind of cool.
Morphology operations basically give
you a way to sort of grow either the
highlights or the shadows of an image.
Min and max grow them sort
of in rectangular ways.
Erode and dilate apply
a probe that you supply,
which can be an arbitrary shape.
And you can do some really
cool tricks like this.
Like here we're going to use a star
shaped probe to sort of grow the
highlights into stars in this image.
You can do things that are a little
less gaudy than this with it too,
but this is kind of a cool example.
Another cool thing is histograms.
We have a really nice set
of histogram functions,
which you can use to
calculate histograms,
but you can also use to perform
a lot of operations on the image.
For example, you can take one image and
sort of infuse it with the
color palette of another image.
That's kind of a cool trick,
which I like a lot.
And the last category of sort
of image operations we have
is called alpha operations,
which are basically, in other words,
for transparency.
We give you a lot of ways to work
with the alpha channels on images
and do those transformations.
Sort of all the standard ways
that you might want to have.
So what data types do we support?
There are two main core formats.
We support 8-bit unsigned integer,
four channels per pixel,
and also four channel per pixel,
32-bit floating point formats.
Within those data types,
we have a couple data
layouts that we support.
We have interleaved data layouts where
you have the first pixel alpha channel,
red channel, green channel,
blue channel stored in some order,
then the second pixels channels,
then the third pixels channels.
We also have planar data layouts where
you have all the red channel image data,
all the green channel image data,
all the blue channel image data.
Sometimes planar formats are
really nice to work with,
so these are an important thing.
And we provide conversions
between all of these core formats.
So we have conversions
from planar to interleaved.
We have conversions between
8-bit and floating point.
And we have conversion operations that
just let you swap around channel orders.
So if you have an RGBA image and
you need a BGRA image or whatever,
we give you ways to do that.
Now we also support a lot of other
data formats as storage formats.
So we have conversions that take
most common image formats and
convert from those into one of the
core formats and then also from the
core formats back to the storage
formats that you're going to want.
So when you're working with image
data that's not in a core format,
what your workflow usually looks
like is you have a conversion to a
core format and then you do a bunch
of processing in that core format.
And then if you need to get back to
one of the other formats at the end,
you convert back after you
do all your processing.
You generally don't want to be sort
of going back and forth all the time.
We have very lenient data requirements
as far as alignment and things like that.
8-bit data only needs
single byte alignment,
so you don't really need
to worry about that at all.
The floating point data types,
we require 4 byte alignment,
which is just native float alignment.
So there's no heavyweight vector
alignment you have to satisfy.
And we don't need containerized data.
We're not passing around objects,
none of this stuff.
We basically want a
pointer to your image data.
We want to know how tall the image is,
how wide the image is,
and what the offset between
consecutive rows of the image is.
With these two features,
what this means is that we can usually
operate on your image data in place.
You don't need to copy it into some
special structure for us to work on it.
You just give us a pointer to your image.
Call the function, and you're fine.
So this reduces our overhead a lot.
And as I mentioned, vImage is vectorized,
so we give you really good performance.
And each function has some dispatching,
so it will use the best
implementation available for the
hardware that it's running on.
On the Mac,
this means that we take advantage
of SSE3 or supplemental SSE3 and
SSE4.1 when they're available.
and on iOS we take advantage of Neon,
which is the vector engine on ARM.
If you're running on the
A5 processor in the iPad 2,
then we'll also take advantage of
some other stuff like hardware,
half precision to floating
point precision conversions and
a few other things like that.
If you're not running on the A5,
you'll fall back to a
very fast software path,
so you still get good performance.
So the thing I want to sort of
drum in here is that we take care
of all these hardware specific
details behind the scenes so you
don't have to worry about them.
You write one code path and
you can get fast performance
across the supported devices.
and David Shull.
We have a lot of things
to talk about today.
And you can provide your own scratch
space to avoid getting hidden
malloc calls or anything like that.
If you're going to provide
your own scratch space,
you need to first query the function
that you're going to use to find
out how much space is needed.
You can use the KV image get
temp buffer size flag to do that.
So the way you use this flag is
that you call the function exactly
the same way that you're going to
call it with all the same arguments,
except the final argument to most
V image functions is a flags argument.
And here you just add in the KV image get
temp buffer size flag and it returns the
amount of scratch space that it requires.
So typically the way you use this
is sort of what's illustrated here,
where you get the amount of
scratch space that's needed,
you allocate that much space,
maybe you have your own custom
allocation or something like that,
you grab the space that's needed
and then you can use that to
apply the filter numerous times
using that same scratch space.
The image is threaded using GCD.
So on devices that have
multiple processors,
we take advantage of that.
And again, this just happens without
any involvement from you.
You don't need to do that.
to worry about it.
So as I said,
just you write your code once.
And if there's more than one processor,
you're going to get
multi-processor performance.
If there's only one processor,
that's fine too.
You get good performance either way.
and you can disable threading if you
already have your own threading engine
or your own tiling engine and you
don't want us to conflict with that.
You pass the kvimage do not tile
flag to the functions and then
we just turn off tiling and you
can take care of all of that.
So if you've already written some of
your own image processing algorithms,
you already have your
own threading model,
that's fine.
You can still work with vimage.
You can just swap us in for whatever
routines you're already using internally.
And our APIs also provide ways
to handle edging that will
support your tiling model.
So if you look here,
suppose you had already written
your own tiling model and you had
broken this image up into tiles.
If you look at, say, tile six,
on the right hand edge of that tile,
there's an edge.
But on the top,
there's no edging and on the left,
there's no edge.
But maybe the bottom has a couple of
pixels that are influenced by the edge.
We give you ways to handle this
even in the face of tiling.
So you can specify that you only
need the edging to occur this way.
So that's really nice.
And so that's the quick
introduction to V-force.
And at this point,
I'd like to bring up my colleague,
Luke Chang,
who will tell you about V-force.
Thank you, Steve.
Hi, everybody.
My name is Luke Chang.
I'm an engineer in Vector Numerics Group.
Today I'm going to tell you about VForce.
In the following about
eight to ten minutes,
I'm going to tell you what is VForce,
how to use VForce and why
you want to use VForce.
So let's get started.
What is VForce?
We made VForce to satisfy
your computational need.
We know smartphones are
not just a phone anymore.
There are tons of apps out there.
Many of them process a lot of data.
Don't even mention the iPad.
Doctors are using it.
Pilots are using it.
So how do we process
those data efficiently?
This is where VForce comes into play.
VForce has elementary
math functions for arrays,
so it handles array data efficiently.
If you're a Mac developer,
you probably are
familiar with it already.
We introduced it in Mac OS X Tiger.
Now we bring it over to iOS 5.
Let's say you want to write
an app to generate sine wave,
a signal generator.
Here's one way you can do it in plain C.
It's very simple, straightforward.
You have output buffer and you
have input buffer indices because
you probably want to generate a
frequency modulated sine wave instead
of just a fixed frequency sine wave.
And then you write a for loop.
to calculate the sign value
of each index and store all
the results to OutputBuffer.
This is very simple.
Nothing can be more simpler than that.
But how can we use v-force for this?
How can we improve this code?
Here's how.
First,
you have to include AccelerateHeader
to have access to AccelerateFramework.
And then you just have to
replace your for loop by a
single function call to vvsignf.
Vv is a function prefix to v-force
functions followed by its functionality.
In this case, it's signf,
single precision sign.
Takes three arguments.
The first argument is the OutputBuffer.
Second argument is the indices.
And the third argument is the
pointer to the array length.
So vvsignf will do the
same thing as a for loop,
calculating the sign value of
each index and store all the
results to the OutputBuffer.
I said it's doing the same thing.
Why did I say it's better?
Well,
let's look at the performance comparison.
This chart shows how many signs you
can calculate in one microsecond.
As you can see, vForce is more than twice
faster than using a for loop.
This means your app
will be more responsive.
The user of your app don't have to
wait long enough to get the results.
That's nice.
But this is not the only
thing vForce has to offer.
Let's also look at the
energy consumption.
This is the energy comparison.
The chart shows how much energy
is consumed per one signed result.
Again, v4 is more than twice more energy
efficient than using a for loop.
This means your app will run longer.
If you're writing apps
for doctor or pilots,
you really want your app to run longer,
right?
So,
We've seen that VVSciX is pretty good.
What else is also available in VForce?
We have transcendental functions, power,
sine, cosine.
[Transcript missing]
V4 supports both single and double
precision folding point numbers.
[Transcript missing]
Thanks, Luke.
I just want to say we really
put a lot of effort into making
a great math library on iOS.
So the fact that VForce is able
to go even faster is actually
really quite impressive.
So now, that was the quick overview of
what we just introduced in iOS 5.
I want to spend a little bit of
time talking about my favorite
thing in the Accelerate Framework,
which is LAPack and BLAS.
And we've improved these
tremendously for iOS 5.
They're really nice.
So I mentioned we improved them.
How did we improve them?
We improved the performance a lot.
So, LAPAC and BLAS now,
the A5 processor and the
iPad 2 has a great double
precision floating point unit.
It's really fast.
And we want to take advantage of
that in LAPAC and BLAS to give
much better performance than
we've been able to give so far.
How do you measure performance
of these libraries?
One of the most commonly used
benchmarks is something called LINPACK.
and this is a very old benchmark.
It actually derives from an
old linear algebra library
called the LINPACK library.
and it basically measures how fast can
you solve a system of linear equations.
When people talk about
the LINPACK benchmark,
there's a lot of confusion because
it's not actually just one benchmark.
It's three separate benchmarks
that all go by that name.
The first one,
you measure how fast can you solve
a system of 100 equations using a
reference implementation of the solver.
Now,
that reference implementation comes from,
as I mentioned, the LINPACK library.
And it's not tuned to the hardware.
It's nothing like that.
The benchmark formally is in Fortran,
so it would be Fortran reference code.
People have ported it to C and
Java and a lot of other languages.
Most of the time you see people talk
about LINPACK benchmark numbers,
this is the benchmark they're
talking about in the mobile space.
When you see someone talk about
a new device's LINPACK score
or something like that,
this is the kind of thing
they're talking about.
They're talking about reference code
running for a fairly small size matrix.
The second benchmark is
a thousand equations,
where you get to use your
tuned implementation.
You get to go ahead and write the
fastest solver you can write and solve
a system of a thousand equations.
And the third benchmark
that goes by this name,
this is the benchmark people
are usually talking about in the
high performance computing world
when they talk about LINPACK.
If you hear about some new
supercomputer that has,
you know,
a hundred petaflops or something,
that's this benchmark.
This is sort of the no-holds-barred
division to LINPACK.
You get to choose your problem size.
If where your computer runs fastest is
on a 1.2 million by 1.2 million matrix,
so be it.
You get to use the fastest
solver you can come up with.
It's the no-holds-barred division.
So that's LINPACK.
And when you see people talk
about LINPACK on mobile devices,
you often see numbers like, you know,
35 megaflops or 50 megaflops.
That kind of number gets
tossed around a lot.
iPad 2, as I mentioned,
it's got a nice processor and the
compiler does a pretty good job.
So with the reference code,
we do a little bit better
than that typically.
We get about 90 megaflops on LINPACK.
I think this is basically criminal
because you've got this beautiful
hardware and you're going to run this
reference code on it that doesn't
take advantage of it at all really.
And so we want to see, you know,
what can we get on
LINPACK using Accelerate,
using a tuned implementation, you know,
actually take advantage of the hardware,
make it as good as we can.
So on the iPad 2 using Accelerate,
Forget mega flops.
We give you 1.5 giga flops on Linpac.
That's more like it.
I should note that not all
of this work is in the seed.
In the seed,
you'll get about 1.3 giga flops.
When iOS 5 ships, you get the full 1.5.
Even 1.3 is pretty good, though.
That's 12 times faster than the
reference code or something like that.
So I think that's great.
And in fact,
the iPad 2 would have been one
of the 500 fastest supercomputers
in the world in 1994.
How cool is that?
Yeah, that's awesome, right?
[Transcript missing]
and all the way up to a Mac Pro where
you get 80 something gigaflops
of double precision performance.
So, you know, three lines of code,
it's portable across all these devices,
we give you really nice
performance on all of them.
And that's really,
that's what we want from Accelerate.
We want to give you something
that's easier to use than it
would be to write your own code.
We want to give you something
that gives you great performance
across all the hardware we provide.
And we want to give you something
that lets you use less energy,
save the battery,
make your app last longer.
If you want more information
about any of this,
we have a couple people you can contact.
There's documentation online.
The V-Image programming
guide is really nice.
And you can also, if you have questions,
post them to the Apple Developer Forums
or just file a bug if something doesn't
work the way you think it should.